Page 1 
First Session, Forty-fourth Parliament,
70-71 Elizabeth II – 1 Charles III, 2021-2022-2023
STATUTES OF CANADA 2023
CHAPTER 18
An Act to amend the Judges Act
ASSENTED TO
JUNE 22, 2023
BILL C-9

Page 2 
RECOMMENDATION
Her Excellency the Governor General recommends to the House
of Commons the appropriation of public revenue under the cir-
cumstances, in the manner and for the purposes set out in a
measure entitled “An Act to amend the Judges Act”.
SUMMARY
This enactment amends the Judges Act to replace the process
through which the conduct of federally appointed judges is re-
viewed by the Canadian Judicial Council. It establishes a new
process for reviewing allegations of misconduct that are not seri-
ous enough to warrant a judge’s removal from office and makes
changes to the process by which recommendations regarding
removal from office can be made to the Minister of Justice. As
with the provisions it replaces, this new process also applies to
persons, other than judges, who are appointed under an Act of
Parliament to hold office during good behaviour.
Available on the House of Commons website at the following address:
www.ourcommons.ca
2021-2022-2023

Page 3 
70-71 ELIZABETH II – 1 CHARLES III
CHAPTER 18
An Act to amend the Judges Act
[Assented to 22nd June, 2023]
His Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of
the Senate and House of Commons of Canada,
enacts as follows:
R.S., c. J-1
Judges Act
1 Section 2 of the Judges Act is amended by
adding the following in alphabetical order:
Commissioner means the Commissioner for Federal
Judicial Affairs referred to in section 73; (commissaire)
Minister means the Minister of Justice of Canada; (mi-
nistre)
2014, c. 39, s. 317
2 Subsection 2.1(1) of the Act is replaced by the
following:
Application to prothonotaries
2.1 (1) Subject to subsection (2), sections 26 to 26.3, 34
and 39, paragraphs 40(1)(a) and (b), subsection 40(2),
sections 41, 41.2 to 42, 43.1 to 56 and 57, para-
graph 60(2)(b) and Part IV also apply to a prothonotary
of the Federal Court.
2006, c. 11, s. 15
3 The definition Minister in section 52.1 of the Act
is repealed.
2006, c. 11, s. 16
4 (1) Subsection 53(1) of the Act is replaced by
the following:
Amounts payable out of C.R.F.
53 (1) The salaries, allowances and annuities payable
under Parts I to III and the amounts payable under
2021-2022-2023

Page 4 
sections 46.1, 51 and 52.15 shall be paid out of the Con-
solidated Revenue Fund.
(2) Subsections 53(2) and (3) of the English ver-
sion of the Act are replaced by the following:
Prorating
(2) For any period less than a year, the salaries and an-
nuities payable shall be paid pro rata.
Monthly instalments
(3) The salaries and annuities payable shall be paid by
monthly instalments.
5 Section 58 of the Act and the heading “Interpre-
tation” before it are repealed.
6 Paragraph 59(1)(a) of the English version of the
Act is replaced by the following:
(a) the Chief Justice of Canada, who shall be the
chairperson of the Council;
7 Subsection 60(2) of the Act is amended by
adding “and” at the end of paragraph (a) and by
repealing paragraphs (c) and (d).
8 Paragraph 61(3)(c) of the Act is replaced by the
following:
(c) respecting the processes and proceedings under
Part IV.
9 Section 62 of the Act is replaced by the follow-
ing:
Employment of counsel and assistants
62 The Council may engage the services of any persons
that it considers necessary for carrying out its objects and
duties, and also the services of counsel to assist the
Council in the processes and proceedings under Part IV.
R.S., c. 27 (2nd Supp.), ss. 5 and 6; R.S., c. 16 (3rd Supp.), ss. 5 and 6; 1992, c. 1,
s. 144(1) (Sch. VII, s. 37(F)); 1993, c. 34, s. 89; 2002, c. 8, ss. 106(1) and (2)(E) and
par. 111(d)(E) and (e)(E); 2014, c. 39, ss. 326 and 327; 2021, c. 23, s. 252
10 The heading before section 63 and sections 63
to 71 of the Act are repealed.
11 Section 72 of the Act and the heading “Inter-
pretation” before it are repealed.
12 The Act is amended by adding the following
after section 78:
2021-2022-2023
Chapter 18: An Act to amend the Judges Act
Judges Act
Sections 4-12

Page 5 
PART IV
Conduct Review Process
DIVISION 1
Complaints Concerning Judges
Definition
Definition of judicial office
79 In this Division, judicial office includes the office of
a prothonotary of the Federal Court.
Removal from Office
Justification
80 For the purposes of this Division, the removal from
office of a judge is justified only if, for any of the follow-
ing reasons, the judge’s continuation in office would un-
dermine public confidence in the impartiality, integrity
or independence of the judge or of their office to such an
extent that it would render the judge incapable of execut-
ing the functions of judicial office:
(a) infirmity;
(b) misconduct;
(c) failure in the due execution of judicial office;
(d) the judge is in a position that a reasonable, fair-
minded and informed observer would consider to be
incompatible with the due execution of judicial office.
Rosters
Establishment of roster of judges
81 (1) The Council shall establish a roster of superior
court judges who may be designated as members of a
panel established under this Division. The judges on the
roster must not be members of the Council.
Number
(2) The number of judges on the roster is set at the dis-
cretion of the Council.
Recommendation
(3) The naming of a judge to the roster must be made on
the recommendation of the Canadian Superior Courts
Judges Association.
2021-2022-2023
Chapter 18: An Act to amend the Judges Act
Judges Act
Section  
12

Page 6 
Term
(4) A judge named to the roster remains on it for four
years unless they cease to hold judicial office or request
to be removed from the roster. When the four-year term
ends, the judge may be renamed to the roster on the rec-
ommendation of the Canadian Superior Courts Judges
Association.
Establishment of lay persons
82 (1) The Council shall establish a roster of lay persons
who may be designated as members of a review panel or
full hearing panel established under this Division.
Number
(2) The number of persons on the roster is set at the dis-
cretion of the Council.
Conditions
(3) To be named to the roster, a person must
(a) never have been admitted to the bar of any
province or to the Chambre des notaires du Québec;
(b) never have worked as a paralegal in Canada; and
(c) meet the other selection criteria established by the
Council.
Selection criteria made public
(4) The Council shall make public the selection criteria
that it has established for the purpose of para-
graph (3)(c).
Term
(5) A person named to the roster of lay persons remains
on it for four years unless they request to be removed
from the roster or, in the opinion of the Council, they
cease to meet the conditions set out in subsection (3).
When the four-year term ends, the person may be re-
named to the roster.
Official languages
83 In naming persons to the roster of judges and to the
roster of lay persons, the Council shall take into account
the fact that the proceedings of panels established under
this Division will be in either or both official languages.
2021-2022-2023
Chapter 18: An Act to amend the Judges Act
Judges Act
Section  
12

Page 7 
Diversity
84 The Council shall name persons who reflect the di-
versity of the Canadian population to the roster of judges
and to the roster of lay persons.
Rosters available to public
85 The Council shall make the roster of judges and the
roster of lay persons available to the public.
Complaints
Complaints
86 (1) Complaints may be made to the Council, in the
form specified by the Council, in respect of a judge of a
superior court for any reason referred to in para-
graphs 80(a) to (d).
Complaint by Council
(2) The Council may make a complaint only if two of its
members have reasonable grounds to believe that the
public’s confidence in the impartiality, integrity or inde-
pendence of the judge or of the judicial office of the judge
could be undermined for any reason referred to in para-
graphs 80(a) to (d).
Anonymous complaints
(3) A complaint may be made anonymously, but such a
complaint may be dealt with only if two members of the
Council have reasonable grounds to believe that the pub-
lic’s confidence in the impartiality, integrity or indepen-
dence of the judge or of the judicial office of the judge
could be undermined for any reason referred to in para-
graphs 80(a) to (d).
Notice to complainant
87 The Council shall establish policies respecting the no-
tifying of complainants of any decisions made under this
Division.
Screening Officer
Designation
88 The Council may designate as a screening officer one
or more persons, including a judge, who meets the crite-
ria specified by the Council.
Referral to screening officer
89 The Council shall refer every complaint to a screen-
ing officer, other than a complaint made by the Council
itself or an anonymous complaint.
2021-2022-2023
Chapter 18: An Act to amend the Judges Act
Judges Act
Section  
12

Page 8 
Dismissal of complaint
90 (1) Subject to subsection (2), a screening officer may
dismiss a complaint if they are of the opinion that it
(a) is frivolous, vexatious or made for an improper
purpose or is an abuse of process;
(b) was not made for a reason referred to in para-
graphs 80(a) to (d); or
(c) does not meet the other screening criteria speci-
fied by the Council.
Screening criteria to be made public
(2) The Council shall make public the screening criteria
that it has established for the purpose of para-
graph (1)(c).
Restriction
(3) A screening officer shall not dismiss a complaint that
alleges sexual misconduct or sexual harassment or that
alleges discrimination on a prohibited ground of discrim-
ination within the meaning of the Canadian Human
Rights Act.
Referral to Council
91 If a screening officer does not dismiss a complaint,
they shall refer it to the Council for the designation of a
reviewing member.
Reviewing Member
Designation
92 In the case of a complaint made by the Council itself
or an anonymous complaint, or on receipt of a complaint
referred to it under section 91, the Council shall desig-
nate one of its members to review the complaint.
Written submissions
93 The reviewing member shall give the judge who is the
subject of the complaint an opportunity to make written
submissions about the complaint within the time limit
established by the Council for the purpose of this section.
Dismissal of complaint
94 (1) The reviewing member shall dismiss the com-
plaint if they are of the opinion that it should be dis-
missed for any reason set out in paragraphs 90(1)(a) to
(c) or that it is wholly without merit.
2021-2022-2023
Chapter 18: An Act to amend the Judges Act
Judges Act
Section  
12

Page 9 
Communication of dismissal
(2) If the reviewing member dismisses the complaint,
they shall inform the complainant in writing of their de-
cision and the reasons for it.
Exclusion
(3) The reasons shall not include information that is con-
fidential or personal, or that is not in the public interest
to disclose.
Referral to Council
95 If the reviewing member does not dismiss the com-
plaint, they shall refer it to the Council for the establish-
ment of a review panel.
Notice of decision
96 The reviewing member shall give notice of their deci-
sion to the judge who is the subject of the complaint and
to the chief justice of the court of which the judge is a
member.
Provision of information
97 After the review panel is established, the reviewing
member shall provide it with every document in their
possession that relates to the complaint. The reviewing
member may also provide the review panel with their ob-
servations about the complaint and their recommenda-
tions about how it should be resolved.
Review Panel
Establishment
98 (1) Subject to subsection (2), on receipt of a com-
plaint referred to it under section 95, the Council shall es-
tablish a review panel consisting of the following persons
designated by the Council to review the complaint:
(a) a member of the Council;
(b) a judge named in the roster of judges; and
(c) a person named in the roster of lay persons.
Direction to review new complaint
(2) If a complaint is referred to the Council under sec-
tion 95 and a review panel established to review a previ-
ous complaint involving the same judge has not yet made
a decision in respect of that complaint, the Council may
direct the review panel to also review the new complaint.
2021-2022-2023
Chapter 18: An Act to amend the Judges Act
Judges Act
Section  
12

Page 10 
Written submissions
99 The review panel shall give the judge who is the sub-
ject of the complaint and chief justice of the court of
which the judge is a member an opportunity to provide
written submissions within the time limit established by
the Council for the purpose of this section.
Basis of decisions
100 The review panel shall make its decision only on the
basis of the substance of the complaint, any information
provided under section 97, any written submissions pro-
vided under section 99 and any other document that it
considers relevant.
Referral to Council
101 The review panel shall refer the complaint to the
Council for the establishment of a full hearing panel if it
determines that the judge’s removal from office could be
justified.
Dismissal of complaint or action
102 If the review panel does not refer the complaint to
the Council under section 101, it may dismiss the com-
plaint or take one or more of the following actions if it
considers it appropriate to do so in the circumstances:
(a) issue a private or public expression of concern;
(b) issue a private or public warning;
(c) issue a private or public reprimand;
(d) order the judge to apologize, either privately or
publicly, by whatever means the panel considers ap-
propriate in the circumstances;
(e) order the judge to take specific measures, includ-
ing attending counselling or a continuing education
course;
(f) take any action that the panel considers to be
equivalent to any of the actions referred to in para-
graphs (a) to (e);
(g) with the consent of the judge, take any other ac-
tion that the panel considers appropriate in the cir-
cumstances.
Notice of decision and reasons
103 (1) The review panel shall give notice of its decision
and the reasons for it to
2021-2022-2023
Chapter 18: An Act to amend the Judges Act
Judges Act
Section  
12

Page 11 
(a) the judge who is the subject of the complaint;
(b) the chief justice of the court of which that judge is
a member; and
(c) the Council.
Communication of dismissal
(2) If the review panel dismisses the complaint, it shall
inform the complainant in writing of its decision and the
reasons for it.
Exclusion
(3) The reasons shall not include information that is con-
fidential or personal, or that is not in the public interest
to disclose.
Request to establish panel
104 If the review panel takes any action under section
102, the judge who is the subject of the complaint may,
within 30 days after the day on which the review panel
sends the judge a notice informing the judge of its deci-
sion, request that the Council establish a reduced hearing
panel to review the complaint.
Provision of information
105 If a reduced hearing panel or a full hearing panel is
established in respect of a complaint that was before a re-
view panel, the review panel shall provide to the present-
ing counsel in respect of the hearing panel all the infor-
mation that was before it and the decision and reasons it
provided under section 103.
Hearing Panels
Presenting Counsel
Designation
106 (1) When it establishes a reduced hearing panel or
a full hearing panel, the Council shall designate one of its
members to designate a lawyer of at least 10 years’ stand-
ing at the bar of any province to act as presenting counsel
in respect of the hearing panel.
Restriction
(2) The member of the Council who designates the pre-
senting counsel shall not be designated as any of the fol-
lowing:
(a) a member of the reduced hearing panel or the full
hearing panel;
2021-2022-2023
Chapter 18: An Act to amend the Judges Act
Judges Act
Section  
12

Page 12 
(b) a member of any appeal panel established in re-
spect of any decision of the reduced hearing panel or
the full hearing panel.
Replacement
(3) The presenting counsel may at any time be replaced
by another presenting counsel designated in accordance
with subsection (1).
Role
107 The role of the presenting counsel consists of
preparing a statement of allegations against a judge who
is the subject of a complaint before a reduced hearing
panel or full hearing panel, as the case may be, and pre-
senting evidence. The presenting counsel is also respon-
sible for bringing an appeal and presenting arguments in
an appeal.
Instructions
108 (1) The presenting council shall take instructions
from the Council member who designated them.
Absence or incapacity
(2) In the event of the absence or incapacity of the Coun-
cil member who designated the presenting counsel, the
Council may designate another Council member to give
instructions to the presenting counsel.
Standards of conduct
109 In fulfilling their responsibilities, the presenting
counsel shall conduct themselves in accordance with the
standards and principles that govern the conduct of
Crown prosecutors, with any modifications that may be
necessary.
Reduced Hearing Panel
Establishment
110 (1) Subject to subsection (2), on receipt of a request
made under section 104, the Council shall establish a re-
duced hearing panel consisting of the following persons
designated by it to review the complaint to which the re-
quest relates:
(a) a member of the Council;
(b) a judge named in the roster of judges; and
(c) a lawyer of at least 10 years’ standing at the bar of
any province.
Direction to review new complaint
(2) If a request is made under section 104 by a judge who
has previously made a request under that section and the
2021-2022-2023
Chapter 18: An Act to amend the Judges Act
Judges Act
Section  
12

Page 13 
reduced hearing panel established in respect of the previ-
ous request has not yet made a decision in respect of the
complaint to which the previous request relates, the
Council may direct the reduced hearing panel to also re-
view the new complaint.
Decision and reasons not considered
111 In considering the complaint, the reduced hearing
panel shall not consider the decision of the review panel
that caused the judge who is the subject of the complaint
to make the request under section 104 or the reasons for
that decision.
Referral of complaint to Council
112 The reduced hearing panel shall refer the complaint
to the Council for the establishment of a full hearing pan-
el if it determines that the removal from office of the
judge who is the subject of the complaint could be justi-
fied.
Dismissal or actions
113 If the reduced hearing panel does not refer the com-
plaint to the Council under section 112, it may dismiss
the complaint or take one or more of the actions referred
to in paragraphs 102(a) to (g) if it considers it appropri-
ate to do so in the circumstances.
Notice of decision and reasons
114 The reduced hearing panel shall give notice of its
decision and the reasons for it to
(a) the judge who is the subject of the complaint;
(b) the chief justice of the court of which that judge is
a member;
(c) the Council; and
(d) the presenting counsel.
Decision and reasons made public
115 The Council shall make public the reduced hearing
panel’s decision and the reasons for it, as soon as feasible
after receiving them, if the reduced hearing panel’s hear-
ings were public. If they were not public, the Council
shall make public as much of the decision and reasons as
possible having regard to the reasons for holding the
hearings, or part of them, in private.
Right of appeal
116 The judge to whom the complaint relates and the
presenting counsel may respectively, within 30 days after
the day on which the reduced hearing panel sends them a
2021-2022-2023
Chapter 18: An Act to amend the Judges Act
Judges Act
Section  
12

Page 14 
notice of its decision, file with the Council a notice ap-
pealing the decision.
Full Hearing Panel
Establishment
117 (1) Subject to subsection (3), on receipt of a referral
of a complaint made under section 101 or 112, the Coun-
cil shall establish a full hearing panel consisting of the
following persons to review the complaint:
(a) two members of the Council who are designated by
it;
(b) a judge named in the roster of judges who is desig-
nated by it;
(c) a person named in the roster of lay persons who is
designated by it; and
(d) a lawyer who is a member of the bar of a province
and who is designated in accordance with subsection
(2).
Designation of lawyer
(2) The lawyer referred to in paragraph (1)(d) is to be
designated by the Minister. However, if the full hearing
panel is being established as the result of a request by the
Minister under section 148 or the Minister does not des-
ignate a lawyer within 30 days after the day on which the
Minister receives written notice from the Council that a
full hearing panel is to be established, the lawyer is to be
designated by the Council.
Direction to review new complaint
(3) If a complaint is referred to the Council under sec-
tion 101 or 112, and a full hearing panel established to re-
view a previous complaint or to consider a request made
under section 148 involving the same judge has not yet
made a decision in respect of the previous complaint or
the request, the Council may direct the full hearing panel
to also review the new complaint.
Decision and reasons not considered
118 In considering the complaint, the full hearing panel
shall not consider the decision of the review panel or re-
duced hearing panel, as the case may be, that led to the
establishment of the full hearing panel, or the reasons for
that decision.
Removal justified
119 If the full hearing panel determines, on a balance of
probabilities, that the judge’s removal from office is justi-
fied, it shall make a decision to that effect.
2021-2022-2023
Chapter 18: An Act to amend the Judges Act
Judges Act
Section  
12

Page 15 
Dismissal or action
120 If the full hearing panel determines, on a balance of
probabilities, that the judge’s removal is not justified, it
may dismiss the complaint or take one or more of the ac-
tions referred to in paragraphs 102(a) to (g) if the full
hearing panel considers that it is appropriate to do so in
the circumstances.
Notice of decision and reasons
121 The full hearing panel shall give notice of its deci-
sion and the reasons for it to
(a) the judge who is the subject of the complaint;
(b) the chief justice of the court of which that judge is
a member;
(c) the Council; and
(d) the presenting counsel.
Decision and reasons made public
122 The Council shall make public the full hearing pan-
el’s decision and the reasons for it, as soon as feasible af-
ter receiving the decision, if the full hearing panel’s hear-
ings were public. If they were not public, the Council
shall make public as much of the decision and reasons as
possible having regard to the reasons for holding the
hearings, or part of them, in private.
Right of appeal
123 The judge who is the subject of the complaint and
the presenting counsel may respectively, within 30 days
after the day on which the full hearing panel sends them
a notice of its decision, file with the Council a notice ap-
pealing the decision.
Rights of Judge
Rights
124 The judge who is the subject of a complaint that is
before a hearing panel has the right to be heard, to cross-
examine witnesses and to adduce evidence, in person or
by counsel.
Statement of allegation and notice
125 The judge who is the subject of a complaint that is
before a hearing panel is to be provided with a copy of
the statement of allegations prepared by the presenting
counsel and given reasonable notice of the subject matter
and the date, time and place of the hearings.
2021-2022-2023
Chapter 18: An Act to amend the Judges Act
Judges Act
Section  
12

Page 16 
Salaries and Annuities
Time in judicial office and salary
126 (1) For the purposes of calculating an annuity un-
der Part I, if a full hearing panel decides that the removal
from office of a judge who is the subject of a complaint is
justified, the day after the day on which the judge is given
notice of the full hearing panel’s decision is the day to be
used to determine the number of years the judge has
been in judicial office and the salary annexed to the office
held by the judge at the time of his or her resignation, re-
moval or attaining the age of retirement unless
(a) the decision is set aside by a decision of the
Supreme Court of Canada, or by the decision of an ap-
peal panel if the appeal panel’s decision is final;
(b) the Minister’s response under subsection 140(1)
provides that no action is to be taken to remove the
judge from office; or
(c) the matter of removal of the judge from office is
put to one or both Houses of Parliament and is reject-
ed by either of them.
Contributions toward annuities
(2) No reservations are to be made under section 50 from
the judge’s salary in respect of the period that begins on
the day after the day on which the judge is given notice of
the full hearing panel’s decision, unless one of para-
graphs (1)(a) to (c) applies, in which case the judge shall
contribute an amount equal to the amount that would
have been reserved from the judge’s salary had subsec-
tion (1) not applied.
Salary increases
(3) For greater certainty, nothing in subsection (1) is to
be construed as removing from the judge any entitlement
to a salary increase that takes effect on or after the day on
which the judge is given notice of the full hearing panel’s
decision.
General
Powers
127 A hearing panel has all the powers vested in a supe-
rior court of the province in which the judge who is the
subject of the complaint resides, including
(a) the power to summon before it any witness and re-
quire them to give evidence on oath, orally or in writ-
ing or on solemn affirmation if they are entitled to af-
firm in civil matters, and to produce any documents
and evidence that it considers necessary; and
2021-2022-2023
Chapter 18: An Act to amend the Judges Act
Judges Act
Section  
12

Page 17 
(b) the power to enforce the attendance of any witness
and compel them to give evidence.
Rules of evidence
128 A hearing panel is not bound by any legal or techni-
cal rules of evidence and may receive and base a decision
on evidence presented in its hearings that it considers
credible or trustworthy in the circumstances of the case.
Hearings public
129 (1) A hearing panel’s hearings are to be public, but
it may hold all or any part of its hearings in private if it
considers doing so to be in the public interest.
Prohibition of publication
(2) A hearing panel may prohibit the publication of any
information or documents placed before it, if it is of the
opinion that such a publication is not in the public inter-
est.
Appeals
Appeal Panel
Establishment
130 On receipt of a notice of appeal filed under sec-
tion 116 or 123, the Council shall establish an appeal pan-
el consisting of the following persons designated by it:
(a) three members of the Council; and
(b) two judges named in the roster of judges.
Power
131 The appeal panel has all the powers vested in the
court of appeal of the province in which the judge who is
the subject of the complaint resides. It may, among other
things, reverse, vary or affirm any decision of the reduced
hearing panel or full hearing panel, as the case may be,
and make any decision the hearing panel could have
made.
Hearings public
132 (1) The appeal panel’s hearings are to be public, but
it may conduct all or any part of its hearings in private if
it considers doing so to be in the public interest.
Prohibition of publication
(2) The appeal panel may prohibit the publication of any
information or documents placed before it if it is of the
opinion that such a publication is not in the public inter-
est.
2021-2022-2023
Chapter 18: An Act to amend the Judges Act
Judges Act
Section  
12

Page 18 
Right to make submissions
133 The judge who is the subject of the appeal and the
presenting counsel are each entitled to make oral and
written submissions to the appeal panel.
Nature of appeal
134 The appeal is to be heard on the basis of the record
of the hearing panel whose decision was appealed and on
any submissions made by the judge who is the subject of
the appeal and the presenting counsel. The appeal panel
may, in exceptional circumstances, admit additional evi-
dence or testimony if, in its opinion, it is essential in the
interests of justice to do so.
Notice of decision and reasons
135 The appeal panel shall give notice of its decision
and the reasons for it to
(a) the judge who is the subject of the appeal;
(b) the chief justice of the court of which that judge is
a member;
(c) the Council; and
(d) the presenting counsel.
Decision and reasons made public
136 The Council shall make public the appeal panel’s
decision and the reasons for it, as soon as feasible after
receiving them, if the appeal panel’s hearings were pub-
lic. If they were not public, the Council shall make public
as much of the decision and reasons as possible having
regard to the reasons for holding the hearings, or part of
them, in private.
Supreme Court of Canada
Notice of application for leave to appeal
137 The judge who is the subject of a decision of an ap-
peal panel and the presenting counsel may respectively,
within 30 days after the day on which the appeal panel
sends them a notice of its decision, file a notice of appli-
cation for leave to appeal to the Supreme Court of
Canada.
Right of attorneys general
138 If leave to appeal is granted by the Supreme Court
of Canada, the Attorney General of Canada and the attor-
ney general of a province may intervene in the appeal.
2021-2022-2023
Chapter 18: An Act to amend the Judges Act
Judges Act
Section  
12

Page 19 
Report to Minister
Report with recommendation
139 (1) If a full hearing panel is established in respect of
a complaint, the full hearing panel shall, as soon as feasi-
ble after the earliest of the following, provide to the Min-
ister a report setting out a recommendation, consistent
with the final decision in respect of the complaint, as to
whether or not the judge who is the subject of the com-
plaint should be removed from office:
(a) the judge and the presenting counsel have both
waived their rights under section 123 or 137,
(b) the time limit for exercising those rights has ex-
pired, and
(c) the Supreme Court of Canada has not granted
leave to appeal or, if it has, it has made a decision in
respect of the appeal panel’s decision.
Decisions and reasons
(2) The report must also set out the full hearing panel’s
decision and any decision of the appeal panel and the
Supreme Court of Canada, as well as the reasons, if any,
for those decisions.
Copy of report
(3) The full hearing panel shall as soon as feasible give a
copy of the report to the judge, the presenting counsel
and the Council.
Report made public
(4) The Council shall make public as much of the report
as it considers appropriate taking into account the extent
to which the decisions and reasons set out in the report
were made public.
Absence or incapacity
(5) In the event of the absence or incapacity of all three
judges of the full hearing panel, the Council shall desig-
nate one of its members to assist the other members of
the full hearing panel in preparing the report or, if the
others are also absent or incapacitated, to provide the re-
port.
Minister’s response
140 (1) The Minister shall respond publicly to the re-
port.
2021-2022-2023
Chapter 18: An Act to amend the Judges Act
Judges Act
Section  
12

Page 20 
Information
(2) For the purpose of responding publicly, the Minister
may seek information from the full hearing panel on any
matter that the Minister considers necessary.
Obligation to provide information
(3) The full hearing panel shall provide the judge who is
the subject of the report and the presenting counsel with
any information that it provides to the Minister.
Absence or incapacity
(4) In the event of the absence or incapacity of all three
judges of the full hearing panel, the Council shall desig-
nate one of its members to assist the other members of
the full hearing panel in providing the information to the
Minister or, if the others are also absent or incapacitated,
to provide the information.
General
Ineligibility
Ineligibility
141 (1) A member of the Council and a judge named in
the roster of judges is not eligible to be designated
(a) as a reviewing member under section 92, or as a
member of any panel established under this Division,
in respect of any complaint involving a judge of the
court of which they are a member; or
(b) more than once under this Division in respect of
the same complaint or the same judge.
Subsections 86(2) and (3)
(2) A member of the Council who is referred to in sub-
section 86(2) or (3) whose belief led to the Council mak-
ing a complaint in respect of a judge or to an anonymous
complaint being dealt with is not eligible to be designat-
ed, in their capacity as a member of the Council or in any
other capacity, as a reviewing member under section 92
or as a member of any panel established under this Divi-
sion, in respect of the complaint.
Designation
Designation from roster of judges
142 The Council may designate a judge named in the
roster of judges to be a member of a panel established
under section 98, 110, 117 or 130 instead of designating a
member of the Council as the section in question re-
quires.
2021-2022-2023
Chapter 18: An Act to amend the Judges Act
Judges Act
Section  
12

Page 21 
Immunity
Immunity
143 A screening officer, a reviewing member or a mem-
ber of a panel established under this Division shall have
the same immunity as a judge of a superior court.
Financial Provisions
Regulations
144 The Governor in Council may make regulations re-
specting the fees, allowances and expenses to be paid or
reimbursed under section 146.
Guidelines
145 (1) Subject to the regulations, the Commissioner
shall make guidelines respecting the fees, allowances and
expenses to be paid or reimbursed under section 146.
Incorporation by reference
(2) The guidelines may incorporate by reference any pol-
icy, guideline or directive of the Treasury Board or any
federal department regarding fees, allowances or expens-
es, as it is amended from time to time.
Obligation to justify differences
(3) If an amount provided for in the guidelines made un-
der subsection (1) differs from the amount provided for
in Treasury Board directives regarding fees, allowances
and expenses, the Commissioner shall make the reasons
for the difference available to the public unless the differ-
ence is attributable solely to compliance with the regula-
tions.
Amounts payable out of C.R.F.
146 (1) Subject to the regulations made under sec-
tion 144 and the guidelines made under subsection
145(1), there shall be paid out of the Consolidated Rev-
enue Fund all amounts payable in respect of the follow-
ing:
(a) the expenses incurred by members of the Council
and judges named in the roster of judges in the course
of carrying out their duties under this Division or Divi-
sion 2;
(b) the expenses incurred by and the allowances
payable to panel members, other than judges, in the
2021-2022-2023
Chapter 18: An Act to amend the Judges Act
Judges Act
Section  
12

Page 22 
course of carrying out their duties under this Division
or Division 2;
(c) the fees of and the expenses incurred by present-
ing counsel in the course of carrying out their duties
under this Division or Division 2;
(d) subject to subsection (2), the fees of and the ex-
penses incurred by lawyers representing judges who
are the subject of a complaint under this Division or
Division 2;
(e) the fees and expenses of lawyers and experts en-
gaged by panels established under this Division or Di-
vision 2; and
(f) the expenses incidental to the conduct of meetings
and hearings under this Division or Division 2, includ-
ing the renting of rooms, the recording and transcrip-
tion of proceedings, translation services and security.
Restriction
(2) Fees and expenses of lawyers representing judges
may be paid only in respect of proceedings under this Di-
vision or Division 2 or in respect of appeals to the
Supreme Court of Canada relating to those proceedings.
For greater certainty, no payments to lawyers represent-
ing judges are to be made in respect of any judicial re-
view of any decision made under this Division or Divi-
sion 2.
Independent review of financial provisions
147 (1) Within 18 months after the day on which the
first report is submitted under section 160 and on every
fifth anniversary of that day, the Council shall cause an
independent review of the application of sections 144 to
146 to be conducted. The review is to be conducted by a
person or body designated by the Commissioner in con-
sultation with the Council.
Report
(2) The person or body conducting the review shall pro-
vide a report of their findings and recommendations to
the Minister, the chairperson of the Council and the
Commissioner. The report shall include a finding on
whether sections 144 to 146 have been applied in a man-
ner consistent with best practices regarding financial
controls.
Report to be made public
(3) The Council shall make the report public with any
redactions that the Commissioner and chairperson of the
Council jointly consider necessary to protect confidential
or personal information.
2021-2022-2023
Chapter 18: An Act to amend the Judges Act
Judges Act
Section  
12

Page 23 
DIVISION 2
Requests Concerning Judges
Request
148 The Minister or the attorney general of a province
may request that the Council establish a full hearing pan-
el to determine whether the removal from office of a
judge of a superior court is justified.
Establishment
149 (1) Subject to subsection (2), on receipt of the re-
quest, the Council shall establish a full hearing panel in
accordance with section 117 to consider the request.
Direction to consider new request
(2) If a full hearing panel established to consider a previ-
ous request made under section 148 or to review a com-
plaint made under section 101 or 112 involving the same
judge has not yet made a decision in respect of the previ-
ous request or the complaint, the Council may direct the
full hearing panel to also consider the new request.
Application of sections 119 to 143
150 Sections 119 to 143 apply, with any necessary modi-
fications, in respect of the request and all proceedings
arising from it.
DIVISION 3
Requests Concerning Office Holders
Removal from office
151 For the purposes of this Division, the removal from
office of a person appointed under an Act of Parliament
to hold office during good behaviour, other than a judge,
is justified only if, for any of the following reasons, the
person’s continuation in office would undermine public
confidence in the integrity of the person or of their office
to such an extent that it would render the person inca-
pable of executing the functions of their office:
(a) infirmity;
(b) misconduct;
(c) failure in the due execution of their office;
2021-2022-2023
Chapter 18: An Act to amend the Judges Act
Judges Act
Section  
12

Page 24 
(d) the person has been placed in a position that a rea-
sonable, fair-minded and informed observer would
consider to be incompatible with the due execution of
their office.
Request
152 The Minister may request that the Council establish
a full hearing panel to determine whether the removal
from office of a person referred to in section 151 is justi-
fied.
Establishment
153 On receipt of the request, the Council shall establish
a full hearing panel in accordance with section 117 to
consider the request.
Application of sections 119 to 125 and 127 to 143
154 Sections 119 to 125 and 127 to 143 apply, with any
necessary modifications, in respect of the request and all
proceedings arising from it.
Removal from office
155 (1) On receipt of a report provided under subsec-
tion 139(1) containing a recommendation that a person
be removed from office, the Governor in Council, may, on
the recommendation of the Minister, by order, remove
the person from office if the person is a person who may
be removed from office by the Governor in Council other
than on address of the Senate or House of Commons or
joint address of the Senate and House of Commons.
Orders and reports laid before Parliament
(2) If an order is made under subsection (1), a copy of
the order and a copy of the report relating to the order
must be laid before each House of Parliament within 15
days after the day on which the order is made or, if either
House is not then sitting, on any of the first 15 days on
which that House is sitting.
Leave of absence with salary
156 The Governor in Council may, for any period that
the Governor in Council considers appropriate, grant
leave of absence to any person, other than a judge, whose
removal from office is recommended because of infirmity
in a report provided under subsection 139(1) and, if leave
of absence is granted, the person’s salary is to continue to
be paid during the period of leave of absence.
2021-2022-2023
Chapter 18: An Act to amend the Judges Act
Judges Act
Section  
12

Page 25 
DIVISION 4
General
Powers, rights and duties not affected
157 Nothing in, or done or omitted to be done under the
authority of, this Part affects any power, right or duty of
the Senate, the House of Commons or the Governor in
Council in relation to the removal from office of a judge
or any other person.
Decision final
158 A decision made by a member of the Council under
any of Divisions 1 to 3 or by a member of a panel estab-
lished under any of those Divisions is final and is not to
be questioned or reviewed in any court other than pro-
vided for in this Part.
Remote appearance
159 For greater certainty, any proceedings or hearings
under this Part may take place by remote appearance.
Annual report
160 (1) The Council shall, within three months after the
end of each calendar year, submit a report to the Minister
setting out, in respect of the year, the number of
(a) complaints received;
(b) complaints dismissed by a screening officer;
(c) complaints dismissed by a reviewing member;
(d) complaints reviewed by review panels, hearing
panels and appeal panels; and
(e) complaints in respect of which any of the actions
referred to in paragraphs 102(a) to (g) were taken.
Report to be made public
(2) After the annual report is submitted to the Minister,
the Council shall make it public.
Replacement of “Minister of Justice of Canada”
13 (1) The Act is amended by replacing “Minister
of Justice of Canada” with “Minister” in the fol-
lowing provisions:
(a) subsection 26(2);
2021-2022-2023
Chapter 18: An Act to amend the Judges Act
Judges Act
Sections 12-13

Page 26 
(b) paragraph 26.1(1)(b);
(c) subsection 28(1);
(d) subsection 29(1);
(e) subsection 31(1);
(f) section 31.1;
(g) subsection 32(1);
(h) subsection 32.1(1);
(i) subsection 33(1);
(j) the portion of subsection 41(3) after para-
graph (b);
(k) section 48; and
(l) subsections 54(1.1) to (3).
Replacement of “ministre de la Justice du Canada”
(2) The French version of the Act is amended by
replacing “ministre de la Justice du Canada”
with “ministre” in the following provisions:
(a) the portion of subsection 51(3) after para-
graph (b); and
(b) the portion of subsection 51(4) before para-
graph (a).
Replacement of “Minister of Justice”
(3) The English version of the Act is amended by
replacing “Minister of Justice” with “Minister” in
the following provisions:
(a) subsections 26(3), (4), (6) and (7); and
(b) the portion of subsection 51(3) after para-
graph (b) and the portion of subsection 51(4)
before paragraph (a).
Transitional Provisions
Ongoing inquiries and investigations
14 The Judges Act, as it read immediately before
the day on which this Act comes into force, con-
tinues to apply in respect of any inquiry or inves-
tigation commenced under that Act before that
day.
2021-2022-2023
Chapter 18: An Act to amend the Judges Act
Judges Act
Sections 13-14

Page 27 
Inquiry requested under subsection 63(1)
15 (1) If an inquiry has been requested under
subsection 63(1) of the Judges Act before the day
on which this Act comes into force and the in-
quiry has not commenced before that day, the re-
quest is deemed to be a request made on that day
under section 148 of that Act, as enacted by sec-
tion 12 of this Act.
Complaint or allegation referred to in subsection 63(2)
(2) If a complaint or allegation referred to in sub-
section 63(2) of the Judges Act is made before the
day on which this Act comes into force and an in-
vestigation into it has not commenced before
that day, the complaint or allegation is deemed to
be a complaint made on that day under subsec-
tion 86(1) of that Act, as enacted by section 12 of
this Act.
Inquiry requested under subsection 69(1)
(3) If an inquiry has been requested under sub-
section 69(1) of the Judges Act before the day on
which this Act comes into force and the inquiry
has not commenced before that day, the request
is deemed to be a request made on that day un-
der section 152 of that Act, as enacted by section
12 of this Act.
Notice of application for leave to appeal
16 If a report made under section 65 of the
Judges Act, as that section read immediately be-
fore the day on which this Act comes into force,
contains a recommendation that a judge be re-
moved from office, that judge may, within 30 days
after that day, file a notice of application for
leave to appeal the report to the Supreme Court
of Canada and, if leave is granted, section 138 of
that Act, as enacted by section 12 of this Act, ap-
plies with respect to the appeal.
Published under authority of the Speaker of the House of Commons
2021-2022-2023
Chapter 18: An Act to amend the Judges Act
Transitional Provisions
Sections 15-16

Page 28 
Available on the House of Commons website
Disponible sur le site Web de la Chambre des com

